---
layout: post
title:  Sleep
date:   2020-11-28
categories: posts
---
Some steps I've taken to hack my sleeping patterns.
<!--more-->

## Preamble

{% newthought 'I have come to fervently believe in the power of small changes.'%} Starting my career in the financial sphere, especially fixed income, I've long had an appreciation for the power of compounding interest. The gist is that as you earn interest on some initial principal amount, over time the interest earns interest too, causing the value of your investment (or debt!) to snowball. Even at relatively small nominal interest rates, frequent compounding results in huge long term returns.

Even though I understood this concept intellectually, in practice I haven't done a great job applying it outside finance. Rather than focus on an easy 1% improvement, I've tended to try for a much harder 10-20% improvement. Changing your habits is **hard**, and aiming ambitious outcome tends to result in failure the majority of the time for me. Psychologically this results in discouragement, which in turn makes me less likely to try again. For a concrete example, several months into the pandemic I noticed I was almost completely sedentary. I would go days without going outside, meaning my only physical activity was going from room to room. To remedy this, I told myself I would start jogging every day for at least 20 minutes. The next morning I get up, lace up my shoes, and hit the pavement. After maybe 5 minutes I'm out of breath and discouraged. I walk home dejected, and think about the failure for the rest of the day. 

Enter tiny habits{% sidenote 1 'NPR&#8217;s Life Kit has a great episode on tiny habits [here](https://www.npr.org/2020/02/25/809256398/tiny-habits-are-the-key-to-behavioral-change). The three key principles are (1) do the smallest version of the habit you want to build toward, (2) find a natural cue to start the habit (could be a time, place etc.), and (3) intentionally celebrating success, e.g. using words of affirmation or fist pumping in the air. As silly as it sounds, (3) is absolutely critical.' %}. Rather than tell myself I'm going to jog for 20 minutes every day, I say I'm going to walk around the block just once. 