---
layout: post
title:  Sleep
date:   2020-12-13
categories: posts
---
Progress I've made in 2020 towards improving my sleep duration and quality.
<!--more-->

{% epigraph 'The best bridge between despair and hope is a good night’s sleep.' 'Matthew Walker' ' "Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams" ' %}

{% newthought 'I have struggled with sleep now for the better part of a decade.'%} I think it started in high school, where I was caught up in a culture of minimizing the importance of sleep. It wasn't uncommon to stay up late (well past 1 AM) "proving" how dedicated you were to studying. My school tried to combat this by implementing access controls to internet, which were easily circumvented with a VPN. It was not at all unusual to pull all-nighters, and have your roommate begrudgingly attest to your scholarliness the next day at lunch. These habits followed me into college, where I found it impossible to put my mind to rest when it was time to sleep. Over the years, I started developing pretty severe anxiety around sleep. I knew it would take me 1, 2, sometimes 3 hours to actually fall asleep after I went to bed. Knowing there was no way I'd wake up feeling refreshed the following morning would in turn make me anxious about getting done everything I needed to do the following day. Later I started my career at a workplace with pretty intense hours; it wasn't uncommong to get home after 11pm or midnight on a weekday. Again, I found it difficult to balance this with the need to decompress after work while also juggling the anxiety of knowing I wouldn't be able to perform at my best the next day.

By late 2019 I was fed up, and some non-sleep related health issues forced me to evaluate what I could do to change my relationship with sleep. Below I outline what I've tried so far and how those approaches have worked out.

## Sleep Apnea
Having been told I was a snorer, I signed up for an overnight sleep study at a clinic. Following the study I was diagnosed with moderate obstructive sleep apnea, with an AHI {% sidenote 1 'AHI stands for Apnea-Hypopnea Index, which measures the number of times your breathing pauses for >10 seconds during sleep. Apnea events often result in brief arousals, breaking the continuity of sleep' %} of 17. I was prescribed a CPAP {% sidenote 2 'CPAP stands for continuous positive airway pressure' %} machine, which I've used nightly ever since. The CPAP forces air through my nose at a pressure level that automatically adjusts to my breathing throughout the night. 

Although I've been on this course of treatment for nearly twelve months as I write this, I can't say it's been particularly effective at improving the quality or duration of my sleep. I think a part of this may have to do with the fact that CPAP alone didn't really address my sleep anxiety, which is the biggest driver of sleep duration for me. There are of course other health benefits of correcting my apnea, and I've grown accustomed to sleeping with the mask so at this point it continues to be a lesser part of my sleep routine. 

## 'Set and Setting
Pre-sleep mindset and the setting in which I go to sleep contain important variables. 

1.  (1) **Temperature.** Cold is gold - in cooler months I sleep with a window open, otherwise with a fan and AC. 
2.  (2) **Environmental stimulation.** I get easily distracted, so I aim for complete sensory deprivation. In practice wearing a sleep mask and ear plugs are effective, especially when I was living above the hustle and bustle of Manhattan.
3.  (3) **Light.** I've noticed my ability to fall asleep is very light sensitive. Wearing a mask helps reduce the impact while trying to sleep, but it's important to manage as an environmental variable before sleep and immediately upon waking up. The ***single most important*** factor I've come across is using a full spectrum lamp when I first wake up. This has been a complete game-changer, but it took a while to adjust my Circadian rhythm before I felt a noticeable effect. I currently use [this](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00PCN4UVU/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o02_s00?ie=UTF8&psc=1) lamp I found off Amazon {% sidenote 3 'Wirecutter has a good [overview](https://www.nytimes.com/wirecutter/reviews/best-light-therapy-lamp/) of lamps, including references to medical literature. It seems like one of the most important factors is achieving an output of 10,000 lux.' %}

## Some Other Findings
Another obvious factor is caffeine. Though I'm not a big coffee drinker, I'm fond of black and green teas, and also sugar-free energy drinks (my favorite breakfast is a sugar-free Red Bull, a cup of yogurt or skyr, and an apple or handful of blueberries). Although I don't think I feel the effects of caffeine more acutely than other people, it does seem to last a longer time in my body. I try to avoid consuming anything with caffeine after noon to avoid interfering with my sleep. Same goes for other stimulants.

Depressants are another matter. I've found both alcohol and THC make it easier to go to sleep, though for me sleep-inducing effects start to wane after an hour or so. If I'm trying to use one of those substances specifically for sleep I try to time it 30 minutes before my goal sleep time. TL;DR - personal drug titration is important! 



